Let's go through some options that affect the cost of your database solution.
The most basic factor for databases that are tied to instances is instance size.
Larger instance size equals a higher cost.
While this sounds very basic,
does everyone who has permission to launch a
database in your AWS account know that?
Overprovisioning instance sizes can significantly add to costs over time.
For database services that don't have instances to size,
some charge by reads and writes.
Others provide options such as on‑demand modes that scale up
and down automatically and charge you based on actual use or
provisioned modes where you have a fixed amount of capacity
that you pay for by the hour.
It's important to understand the pricing model of your database service and
compare the different options based on your actual usage.
As you scale up or down,
you may need to adjust your pricing strategy for a particular database service.
For example,
reserved instances and savings plans are good
options for more continuous workloads.
Whether or not you use managed services can also be a cost factor.
In some cases, managed services may cost more on your AWS bill,
but you may spend less on resources to support your AWS infrastructure.
Disk type and usage is another factor for cost.
The disk type you use should be based on your performance requirements.
Utilizing slower,
less expensive storage for less frequently accessed data can help control costs.
Some database services like Timestream automatically manage this for you.
How much disk are you allocating for your databases? For some
storage types, you pay for allocated space,
while others only charge for space actually used.
For example, if a developer allocates 1 TB of data in their database,
you are going to pay for that whether they fill it or not and
whether the database is running or not.
In this case,
you would want to encourage developers to only allocate the space they
actually need for that short duration so you're not paying for unused
space. For each database type and environment,
be sure to understand which type of space you are dealing with
and provision your disk space accordingly.
Backups are another area of cost that can be easy to overlook,
but again,
everything you store or allocate is going to have an
associated charge. Some services backup to S3,
which saves you money over using other disk types to store backups.
You should also have a backup lifecycle plan in place to prevent holding onto
backups for longer than they are useful to your application.
When considering multi‑AZ or multi‑region,
you're going to double or even triple the cost,
depending on your configuration. Again, if your requirements
dictate that you need high availability,
then do it.
If not, then that's another great place to save on costs.
The actual database engine you choose to run also affects costs.
Are you running an open source or commercial database engine?
What is the license cost?
Is that engine providing you unique features to justify the cost?
Network transfer can also incur charges,
so it's important to understand if that's a factor with
your database service and optimize your design to minimize
those network transfer costs.
Finally, pricing models are constantly evolving,
and over the years,
AWS has introduced several different ways to lower your operating costs.
Some built‑in tools to help you optimize costs include AWS Budgets,
AWS Cost & Usage Report, and AWS Cost Explorer.
Regular use of these tools helps you stay informed of the best
pricing options for your overall usage and can result in
significant savings to your monthly AWS bill.
Great job, you've seen the importance of understanding your application
requirements and how that really drives the design of your database.
In particular,
you saw how understanding the type and volume of data you need to store,
expected traffic volume and response times, and any compliance
requirements is essential when designing your database.
You covered different availability options,
including single, multi‑AZ, and multi‑region,
and you saw the many factors that can affect the cost of your database solution.
Join me in the next module, where we'll discuss what to consider when migrating and deploying databases.